We're talking to Professor Brian Fagan, and you say that these are compilations.
Maybe we can just enter the discussion there.
Well, they're edited books.
Both are edited books and published by Oxford University Press' Trade Reference Department,
probably one of the finest reference departments, certainly in American publishing.
Well, I think the Companion series, it's just an extraordinary series of books, unique.
I can't think of anything else anywhere that
that approaches them.
I mean, it's not just a reference book.
And I think what you have attempted to do here is gather many, many learned essays, especially for the companion book.
Tell me a little bit about your own interest in archaeology, two books here now, many others.
I've written, well, it depends how you cut the cat, but I think I've written about 36 books.
36 books.
Of which about 16 or 17 or 18 are probably archaeology.
I also write about sailing, which is my other hat.
And I started off my career, I went to Cambridge in England and studied archaeology there.
And then I, in 1959, went out to Africa and worked there for seven years studying and working on...
early African history, that's black African history, which at the time was almost unknown, and was in on the ground floor of that.
And then in 1966, I came over to the United States, spent a year at the University of Illinois in Champaign, and then came out to California, and I've been a professor at the University here ever since.
And since being in this country, I've become a generalist.
I'm one of the few people in archaeology who is not a specialist who writes about archaeology for the general public.
It's not done for 30 years.
And I think this Eyewitness to Discovery book is a terrific idea, because when we think of discovery, of course, we visualize the people who find these wonderful things, but how often do we also realize that they articulated their findings in words?
Yes, and one of the interesting things about it is the most articulate people were the people up to about 19...
30, after then, archaeology got much more specialized, and people got more academic in their writing, and there isn't nearly so much exciting writing as there used to be, which is a pity.
Yeah, because, well, there was that sense of derring-do also, though.
That's true, absolutely right.
And maybe some of the great discoveries were, although spectacular, and not particularly scientific either.
They had an understatement, they weren't.
But there was a sort of panache, and that's what they call the Indiana Jones Syndrome in this day and age,
What syndrome again, sir?
I'm sorry, what syndrome again?
Indiana Jones.
Okay, fine, yeah.
A panache, which actually is brilliantly captured by that lady who writes Egyptian mysteries with Amelia Peabody.
Are you familiar with her?
No, I'm not.
There's a lady who writes a series of detective stories.
Her name is Peters, I think.
They're wonderful because she's sort of captured the atmosphere of the 1880s and 90s in Egypt and so on.
adventuring, extraordinary discoveries and so on.
And since 1920, archaeologists changed and become much more narrow and specialized.
And today, if you make a great discovery, your big concern is that you're going to study it right and publish it right rather than be excited for the general public.
What do you think are some of the great discoveries that remain to be made?
Oh, absolutely the area of the world which is going to be
dramatically unveiled, I think, in the next 50 years is China.
Royal tombs in China, and as the Chinese develop an expertise in the recovery of these burials, and one of the very, very nice things about the Chinese is that they are not arrogant.
And as archaeologists, they say we lack the technical ability or the facilities to excavate these tombs, like the tomb of the first emperor of China,
and they just leave it alone until they judge that they're ready, which is refreshing in this day and age.
And, of course, being the kind of government that they are, they can have a pretty good control over plunderers, I guess, too.
Oh, yeah, and they also have a very careful control over the tidal wave of foreign archaeologists who would love to work in China.
They have a very controlled environment, which actually, in some ways, is a good thing.
Now, that's, of course, Asia, but how about things that might be of particular interest, say, to those of us with a Western bent, great historical discoveries with names that might even resonate?
You mentioned here Antony and Cleopatra here, these kinds of things.
I think we're going to find one of the most exciting discoveries in recent years has been the discovery of
a garrison on the Roman wall where they found documents written on birch.
Come on.
Birch.
Oh, yeah.
A slivers of birch.
It's not in the book.
At a place called Vindolanda.
I think what's going to happen is you're not going to get so much spectacular discovery from digging, as I say in the book.
You're going to get more and more of them out of labs.
I mean, in these days,
You can tell whether people are left-handed when they make stone tools.
You can trace the sources of clay pots from the materials in them using high-tech science.
And I think one of the big dramatic discoveries in the next 50 years again is going to be what comes out of the lab rather than what comes out of the ground very often.
A lot of this, of course, is interpretation as well, isn't it?
There's still a great deal of room for controversy, I would imagine.
Oh, indeed.
The more we know, the more controversy there is.
In fact, one of the classics is the first discovery of the Americas, which some people think was the first settlement.
It was 40,000 years ago.
Most people think it was 15.
Who is right?
And in the next 50 years, we may find out.
How do you suppose we would be able to determine that?
Just simply by finding the incredibly small archaeological sites where these things
are preserved.
And unfortunately, it's so long ago, and a lot of these people were moving around, they left very little behind them, and it's difficult to find it.
Tell me a little bit about, you mentioned that you studied at Cambridge.
Can you tell me a little bit about your own work in the field?
Well, I worked for seven years on late historical sites in Central Africa, mainly in Zambia.
And what we were looking at was the first settlement
of the area by the ancestors of the peoples who live there today, all of whom settled there in the last 2,000 years.
And this involved digging, farming villages, and working on very complicated tribal histories involving not only historical records but oral traditions.
And when it came, when you decided to do this companion, that must have been a daunting, intimidating assignment.
I was actually asked by Oxford University Press to do it.
I didn't have the idea.
A number of archaeologists, they were canvassing archaeologists to see if it was worth doing.
And believe it or not, there were some who said it wasn't, which I think is stupid.
And then some other archaeologists said, well, you should talk to Fagan because he's a generalist.
And they approached me, and my first reaction was exactly, as you said, is, my God, how are we going to do this?
But the way Oxford do these is that they do revolve the books around very stimulating themes, and the challenge of developing the themes got me into it.
And it wasn't until I'd done that I realized that we were ending up with 300 contributors and 700 entries.
Wow.
Huge.
I had a sort of editorial board of
four colleagues who were wonderful and the community of archaeologists responded and the result is a massive I think definitive statement of what archaeology is how it works and why it's important in today's world and also what we know about the past I think it's very important to point out that these companions as you point out are thematic you know it's it's they are not merely encyclopedia encyclopedic compendia I mean they you do production we lay out very carefully
what it is and what it is not.
And that's the right.
It revolves around five or six very important themes.
I mean, it can actually be read as a book.
My sympathy.
But yes, I mean, you can take an issue and just track through with all the different cross-reference systems, and you can study, for example, early human evolution from the angle of the fossils, the angle of the archaeology of an area, the angle of particular sites, the angle of the people who found the stuff,
and get it from all sorts of different angles or just follow your nose deeper and deeper into a subject.
It's great fun.
And how about assembling the staff of contributors?
That was very straightforward because the key is to choose a really good editorial board who are first-rate scholars and yet have a vision and share your vision of what the book did.
In this one, we chose four people, none of whom knew each other.
And Oxford pulled us together in New York for a meeting
And we spent two days having each developed our image of what our sections were.
We divide the book up in sections.
And to our astonishment, not only did everyone 90% agree, but they all got on like house and fire.
Wow.
And Oxford said this is a somewhat rare occurrence.
And we really had absolutely no tensions between the board at all.
And it turns out that each member knew people in their area.
And if they didn't, they knew people who did.
And using networks of people we knew, we put together the contributors.
And in each case, you put together a contributor and an alternate, because in case someone turns it down.
And then you have the additional problem, of course, which is the toughest problem with a book like this, are the people who do not deliver.
And this drives you nuts, and you've just got to pursue people and live with it.
I mean, this is not for my piece, but do people get paid for this?
They get a very modest thing.
I think it's about 10 cents a word.
It's prestigious to write for a companion.
Well, I would think so.
To be glimpsed in that environment.
In fact, I'm getting letters from people saying, now how nice, I'm so glad to be in there.
But if you have any illusions, it's going to be possible.
Now, you mentioned New York.
This was not a U.K.-driven... This was a New York companion.
Both New York and England do companions, and New York actually is assuming quite a leading role in doing them.
They really are two separate publishing entities in a way, aren't they?
They do consult and they also compete, I think, to some degree.
The politics are complex, I suspect.
But this is purely a New York book.
But I think the American unit of Oxford is almost, I mean, they have entered the trade field in a very aggressive way, I think.
Very aggressively.
And they're doing so.
Also, they're adding staff and
and doing more.
And there are wonderful people to work with.
I have no complaints about Oxford.
Oh, I love Oxford.
I mean, and the bottom line matters, which is, you know, so unusual when you come to... The bottom line matters, and quality, quality, quality, quality of content...
quality of products.
It's a joy to work with.
Now tell me about the other book, the new one, which I just got.
You'll have to forgive me.
We just got it two days ago, so I can't... What they normally do with an Oxford companion is put together a series of accompanying volumes.
There are a couple of other projects running which are going with this companion.
They always do an anthology.
This anthology is a
anthology of first-hand descriptions of archaeological discoveries, preferably by the people who wrote them, who found the sites.
For example, you'll find John Lloyd Stevens, the guy who found the Maya there, you'll find Austen Henry Layard in there, et cetera, et cetera, or Leakey in there.
And really, you try and get an immediacy to the discovery by using first-hand accounts.
And of course, and then the excitement of discovery.
Yes, exactly.
And actually, one of the best passages, I think,
is a passage written by a lady called Mary Chubb, C-H-U-B-B, about working at Almana in Egypt and what she felt when she found the figurine.
And that really is the essence of what it's all about.
You know, I found similar.
People say, why do people collect first editions of books?
Why are they willing to spend, you know, tremendous amounts of money for what amounts of, you know, pieces of paper?
I'm not.
I write the damn thing.
Are you a bibliophile?
No.
But I mean, it was burnt down in 1977, Nick, and I lost all my books.
I'm sorry, what happened again?
My house burned down.
Oh, I'm sorry.
I lost 3,500 books, and since then I've barely bought books.
I find it very hard.
I understand Frank Kermode recently.
There was an item in the TLS where his library was destroyed in a fire.
Really?
I didn't know that.
Yeah, this was about a month or two ago.
Mine went, and people were very generous with placing it.
Generally, since then, I haven't collected books.
But my point is, you know, you feel something.
You know, if it's something contemporaneous or something that an author handled, you can't define it.
You feel it.
And I think even more so in archaeology, when you feel, when you pick something up, as you're describing this woman picking something up, you know, it's a magical, I suspect it's a magical feeling.
It's a lure.
It's a lure that's less common now than it used to be because...
people now are so scientific that they're much more concerned that they've done the job right, which is good.
They're more conserved information than a discovery.
One of the best-handled discoveries of recent years are the lords of Sipan, these spectacular graves in Peru of warrior priests whose wealth, I think, exceeds Tutankhamen.
I think the tombs are better.
Really?
People who've done that have taken extraordinary efforts to conserve the material,
and to record it right, and it really is a triumph.
There have been some stories recently in the New York Times about Afghanistan, for instance.
Oh, the place just getting looted there.
And when you see something like that, what do you feel?
Disgust, horror.
You feel almost raped.
People have no respect for the past, and when you get down to it, to those people it's just money and loot.
On the other side of the coin, you're dealing with war zones, you're dealing with people who are chronically poor, and so on and so forth.
But it's a tragedy for the whole of humankind because in the final analysis, the past is our collective cultural heritage.
Is there a golden age of archaeology?
No, there's a golden age.
Not really?
Yes.
Now, if you talk about a golden age of archaeology... I'm always looking for my lead, you see.
I think you just gave me my lead.
No, let me explain.
The golden, the heroic age of archaeological discovery was about 1840 to 1920.
It culminated in the discovery of the tomb of Tut and Carmen and the discovery of the wall graves at Ur.
The golden age of what we know about the past, what we are now capable of finding out about it, is now.
And the potential of what archaeology can do if the past is not destroyed and looted is stagnant.
And when you can tell that people are left-handed or identify beetles which occupied houses and things like that, you really...
are achieving something scientifically.
Explain the Beatles now.
There's a case of a site in England where
They had a mysterious platform in the middle of a swamp, and they established there were no houses on it simply by finding that there were no beetles there which are the sort that feed on domestic garbage.
It's the sort of thing they're doing now.
How about, you mentioned garbage, how about the examination of dumps?
There's a man in Arizona, Bill Raffi, he's either in the book or we took it out because of space.
who has devoted his career to studying modern urban garbage.
And he's looking at, on the one hand, things like resource management, waste management,
what cat foods, different people and different incomes, pets eat, and so on.
Yeah, but now, how would that, of what value would be information like that?
It's a lot, because what you're developing are, it's good marketing information, it's good information for people who deal with waste disposal.
I mean, really, he is consults for a lot of these people.
But it's also priceless to archaeologists, because what you're looking at is the ways in which garbage is formed, garbage is discarded, which may seem bizarre, but remember that we are basically the science of garbage.
We study people's discards.
That's what archaeology is.
Yeah.
And it's a very good way of studying people because you might have, say, an African-American slave community on a sugar plantation in the South who are anonymous.
They were non-literate, and the only surviving evidence of them isn't in the records of the overseers.
It's in their garbage.
Wow.
Bones they have and so on.
And, of course, day in and day out,
the material that you study is the garbage, as you say, but the more spectacular ones are the Tutankhamens, you know, where this material is by no means garbage at all, you know.
So that's funeral offerings.
These are the belongings of the living person sent to accompaniment in the other world.
That is a very different set of variables, like the lords of Seapalm were buried in their full regalia.
From that, you get really precise statements about the ideology of courts,
the great culture, how people, religious beliefs changed, writing, whatever it is, and that is invaluable.
But one of archaeology's most powerful things is it really allows us to study the enormous diversity of, say, 18th century New York or slave plantation or even an early Egyptian town from artifacts, because artifacts ultimately are manufacturers which are as powerful statements as words.
You see, history has always been defined as the recorded, the documentation of human events in words.
You can document them just as much by artifacts as you can by... But apparently that's what's happening now, then.
Yeah, it's a complete redefinition of what history is.
I think so.
Especially when you reflect that huge areas of the world had no written records until Victorian civilization expanded into far parts of the world.
And a lot of the history of Africa, say, is written purely of archaeology.
And archaeology is a unique way of looking at how peoples have changed over enormous periods of time, two and a half million years.
And when we think of it, you know, history goes back to Herodotus and... About a thousand years.
But archaeology as a science is how old?
I suspect about two and a half million.
I mean, as a... As a science?
As a strict science, I would say it's about a hundred years old.
As an amateur pastime, it goes back to medieval times.
I didn't think it went back that far.
What you call it, treasure hunting, antiquarian curiosity, wholesale digging.
I would say it's a product basically of the last 150 years.
And when you say that this is the golden age, how much of this is due to the impact of computers?
Oh, an enormous amount.
It's the impact of high technology science as a whole.
The technique of radiocarbon dating, for example.
the use of computers to marshal and analyze enormous quantities of data, the use of high techniques like spectroscopy.
I'm glad you didn't love me.
Analysis of trace elements in metals and tracing where trade routes, you name it, it's been done.
There were experts on ancient beetles, ancient worms, ancient animal bones, ancient plants, and you can go on, the list is enormous.
all of it the result of science.
But of course in the final analysis you still have to have somebody to interpret all this material.
Ah yes, and one of the important things about this anthology is that you're talking about
the great archaeologist having an instinct for discovery, an instinct of knowing where to dig and where to search.
Let's pursue that just a bit.
How important is instinct, as ineffable as it may be, just out of curiosity?
It is, in my judgment, absolutely vital.
One of the problems with archaeology today is that it's trained enormous numbers of specialists, many of whom are experts on light beetles.
How many of these people are little more than technicians in small world?
Relatively few.
The greatest archaeologists are those who have a broader vision, who can place their work in a broader context, and at the same time have the instinct for discovery, which people like Louis Leakey, Mary Leakey, Austin Henry Layard,
John Lloyd Stevens had.
It's a priceless gift.
And you can't define it.
You can't really define it.
I mean, you can be in the middle of a desert and all of a sudden say, it's here.
There's stuff here.
And when you look at a place, you say, I think I'm going to dig there because in a way you can project yourself into the minds of people who live there.
I don't have the gift myself, but other people do.
It's a very rare gift.
And there are very few truly great archaeologists.
And have you personally seen this in people?
Yes.
Oh, yes.
Can you name me a couple of examples?
You mentioned Leakey.
I'm sorry, who?
Louis Leakey.
Leakey, right.
He was a very difficult, very controversial man, but he had an extraordinary instinct for discovery.
His wife, Mary, was even better than him.
Better.
Oh, she was a better scientist.
She just recently died, didn't she?
I think, yeah.
Yeah, she died about two, six weeks ago.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, it was a big piece.
He's one good example.
Another good example is Gordon Willey, W-I-L-L-E-Y, who is the sort of doyen of American archaeologists who worked in the Mayan.
He worked in Peru, and back in the 1940s,
He was one of the first people to go and study a landscape and look at changing settlements using survey techniques, which is something that requires extraordinary instinct to do well.
There were one or two brilliant people.
In a discussion like this, of course, we have to bring up Schliemann at some point.
And perhaps you can assess his...
History has not been kind to Heinrich Schliemann.
Heinrich Schliemann was an old-fashioned entrepreneur.
He went from rags to riches.
He really did.
He was acutely aware of his public image.
He decided to become an archaeologist and nothing would stand in his way.
And he became one absolutely convinced that he could find Homeric Troy and prove that Homer was true.
And if you look at his work with that perspective,
You can understand where he's coming from and his hard-driving business techniques to do it.
I mean, Troy, he employed as some of his supervisors, engineers who'd worked on the digging of the Suez Canal, and he dug on a large scale.
He was not, and history has not been kind to his claims.
I mean, for example, this famous treasure, which has just turned up in Russia, may well have come from all sorts of different levels and not from just one find.
and his famous story of how he found it may in fact have been a fabrication.
We don't know.
He is a man whose veracity is sometimes questionable.
And there have been allegations regarding Carter's discovery of the Tutankhamen tomb as well.
Carter was a good guy.
Carter was a very difficult, very moody man.
He was, within the limitations of his time, an excellent archaeologist, a superb artist.
The controversy over Tutankhamen's tomb, as far as I know, seems to revolve over whether he and Carnarvon actually went into the burial chamber.
The day before, something like that.
I wish they did, there's no question.
And they might have taken a few little things for themselves, I guess.
Oh, yes.
And who wouldn't?
The zone between a collector and an archaeologist is much narrower than today.
Right.
But no one can challenge the extraordinary...
achievement of his clearing of that too.
It's remarkable.
There's a very good book called The Complete Tutankhamen written by a guy called Nicholas Weaves which really explores these issues and there's also a biography of him.
He comes out of it pretty well.
Yeah, good.
I think, sir, we've got plenty of material here.
I'm delighted that you're able to take a little bit of time to talk with me.
And we'll write this thing Thursday, and I'll move it out next week.
Good luck.
And if you have an address, I'd be happy to send you a copy.
Great.
170-HOT-SPRING-ROAD.
Santa Barbara, where the sun shines, 93108.
Excellent.
Good.
Thank you very much, sir.
Have a nice evening.
It's not going to get you so late.
This is not late at all.
I'm still working.
Good night.
Bye-bye.